CDP18S020 Evaluation Kit - COSMAC TINY BASIC

Preface 

TINY BASIC provides the most fundamental of those functions normally attributed to the high-level programming language called BASIC. It is specifically designed for a microcomputer with minimal memory. The TINY BASIC interpreter program requires only 2K bytes of storage. Thus, an Evaluation Kit with 4K of RAM can accomodate modest (about 100 statements in length) TINY BASIC programs. 

TINY BASIC is perhaps the best language for the beginning microcomputer programmer. It is easily learned, and elementary application programs may be developed quickly. For the more experienced programmer, TINY forms the kernel of a system whose facilities may be extended indefinitely by the addition of machine-language subroutines .(limited only by the amount of memory úwhich is available).
 
TINY packs a significant amount of processing capability within 2K bytes. For example, it includes its own line editor, and it provides a rich assortment of error messages to the user. However, clearly one cannot expect certain features which are normally available only in 8K systems. For example, TINY does not do floating-point arithmetic. (Its numeric capability is limited to integers in the range -32768 to +32767.) It cannot directly handle arrays or alphanumeric strings. (On the other hand, each of these (and other) advanced facilities may be added via a machine-language extension). In addition, one must recognize that economies in memory space used were achieved at the expense of processing speed. 

Generally, then, TINY BASIC may be considered as a good "budget" high-level language for a user with a comparable microcomputer setup. Although TINY is quite slow and is of limited capability, it can act as the nucleus of a system whose sophistication may be indefinitely extended. 

10-1 

COSMAC TINY BASIC 
INTRODUCTION 
We assume that you are already familiar with section III of the Evaluation Kit Manual which explains the functions available from the resident utility program UT4. UT4 permanently resides in memory locations 8000-8IFF. After it is given control (via the RESET, RUN U, CR or LF sequence), it types its prompt character, an asterisk, indicating that it is awaiting your input. Each of your input lines (terminated with a CR) is interpreted and executed by UT4. After dis-posing of your input command, UT4 indicates that it is ready for new. input by typing another * prompt. 

One important function of UT4 is to permit you to load an arbitrary sequence of hexadecimal digits (a machine language program) into an arbitrary area in memory and then to invoke this program (transfer control to it; run it) via the appropriate $P command. When your program completes its computation, it may relinquish control back to UT4 by executing a C08039 instruction (a long branch to the location labeled START on p.3-l6), provided all registers used by UT4 have the values they had when UT4 exitedf Under these conditions, a user program halt (or exit) would be signified by a new * UT4 prompt. 

COSMAC 2K TINY BASIC is a program which must be loaded into the lowest 2K bytes of memory (locations 0000-07FF). A hexadecimal listing of the program and loading instructions for it appear in Appendix A. After TINY BASIC is made resident, control is transferred to it using the proper $P UT4 command (see Appendix A). Once it receives control, TINY BASIC delivers its prompt character, a colon, and awaits your input. Each time after it has properly disposed of an input line (terminated with a carriage return -CR), TINY BASIC again types its : prompt.
 
---------
note: in particular, P should be 5. 
10-2

CDP18S020 Evaluation Kit 		COSMAC TINY BASIC 

If an input line does not begin with a number, TINY BASIC immediately interprets it and executes it. (The line is palled a statement.) If the line begins with a number (normally followed by a statement), then TINY BASIC merely stores it, in the proper position, in an area of memory where the user program (a sequence of statements ordered by statement number) is ~~led. If the statement number is the same as one already existing in this area, then the new statement replaces the old one. Thus, you load a TINY BASIC program by entering a sequence of statements (one per line), each preceded by a unique statement number. The program must have at least one END statement in it. 

After your program has been loaded, you can run it by typing a RUN command (equivalent to the $P command to UT4). TINY BASIC will then interpret and execute your program's statments, in order, following the rules discussed in subsequent sections. When an END statement is encountered during execution, control will be passed back to TINY BASIC's "enter" mode, and another : prompt will be issued. 

Note that TINY BASIC assembles statements which begin with numbers into the program area in memory without any further analysis. Errors are detected only when execution is attempted. If an entered line consists only of a line number, it is considered a deletion. The previously inserted statement with the same line number is erased. Note also that 0 is not a valid line number. Blanks within a line have no significance to TINY. All spaces, until the first non-numeric character, are totally ignored. After that, however, blanks are preserved in the memory copy of the statement (i.e., each blank character occupies one byte). 

NUMBERS

A number is any sequence of decimal digits optionally preceded by a sign. If no sign is present, the number is assumed positive. Since TINY BASIC stores all numbers internally as l6-bit signed integers, positive values may run from 0 to 32767 (2 15 _1) and negative values may run from -1 to -32768 (_2 15). 

10-3 

CDP18S020 Evaluation Kit 	COSMAC TINY BASIC 

VARIABLES
A variable is any single capital letter (A-Z). Each possible variable is assigned a unique two-byte location in memory. The value of the variable is the contents of that location --i.e., a number in the range -32768 to +32767. 

EXPRESSIONS 
An expression is a combination of one or more numbers or variables, joined by operators and possibly grouped by parenthesis pairs. The permissible operators are: 

+ 	addition 
-	subtraction 
* 	multiplication 
/ 	division 

Whenever TINY BASIC encounters an expression within a statement (during its execution) it evaluates the expression --combining the numbers and the values of the variables, using the indicated operations. The exact disposition of the final computed value depends on the type of statement. This is discussed further later. 

Internal sub-expressions within parentheses are evaluated first. Usually parentheses make clear the order in which operations are to be performed. However, if there is ambiguity because parentheses are absent, TINY gives precedence to multiplication and division over addition and subtraction. Thus, in evaluating 
	B-14*C 
the multiplication is performed first. In cases involving two operators of equal precedence, evaluation would proceed from left to right. An expression may be optionally preceded by a sign.
 
10-4

CDP18S020 Evaluation Kit    COSMAC TINY BASIC 

Note that during the evaluation of an expression, all intermediate values, and the final value, are truncated --using the lowest 16 bits of the results. That is, expressions are evaluated modulo 216  TINY BASIC makes no attempt to discover arithmetic overflow conditions, except that an attempt to divide by zero results in an error stop. 

The following are some examples of valid expressions: 
(Note that a single variable or number is also an expression.) 
A 
123 
1+2-3 
B-14*C 
(A+B)/(C+D) 
-128/(-32768+(I*I¯ 
((((Q))))

The following are some examples of 
-4096 
15*4096 
32768/8 
30720+30720 
because any number in the range 32768 to 65535 (2**15 to 2**16) has a sign bit of 1 (making it negative), so that it is actually treated by TINY BASIC as if 65536 (2 16 ) were subtracted from it.

THE RND FUNCTION 

TINY BASIC includes the ability to generate a positive pseudo-random number in a specified range. Whenever it encounters the form 
RND (expression 1, expression 2) 
during execution of a statement, TINY generates a random number in the range from the value of expression 1 to the value of expression 2, inclusive. The resulting number may be used as would any other number. In particular, the above form may itself be used within another expression. If the arguments are invalid, an error stop may result. 

10-5 

CDP18S020 Evaluation Kit COSMAC TINY BASIC 

THE RND FUNCTION (cont'd) 

RND (1,100) RND (A,B) 
are valid RND functions (assuming 0<A<B). 

STATEMENT TYPES 

A statement normally begins with a keyword, such as PRINT or GOTO, indicating the type of statement. The interpretation of the remainder of the statement depends on this keyword. In some cases, a short form of the key word is also acceptable -- for example, PR instead of PRINT. 

REM STATEMENT 

Following the keyword REM (for remark or comment) any sequence of characters may appear. This statement is ignored by TINY BASIC. It is used to permit you to intersperse arbitrary comments or remarks within your program. 

END STATEMENT 

END must be the last statement executed in a program. It is used to halt execution and return to TINY BASIC's "enter" mode. There may be as many END statements in a program as needed. 

LET STATEMENT 

This statement has the form 
LET variable = expression Alternatively, the keyWord LET may be omitted entirely. Execution of this statement assigns the value of the expression to the variable. The following are valid LET statements: 

LET A=B+C 
I = I + 1
J = 0
LET Q = RND (5,33)

10-6 
 
CDP1BS020 Evaluation Kit 	COSMAC TINY BASIC 

IF STATEMENT 

This statement has the form 
IF expressionl relation expression2 THEN statement 

The keyword THEN may be omitted entirely. Execution of this statement evaluates the two expressions and compares them according to the relation specified. If the condition specified is TRUE,  then the associated state-ment is executed. Otherwise, the associated statement is skipped. The permissible relational operators are as follows: 

= equal 
< less than. 
> greater than 
<= less than or equal (not greater) 
>= greater than or equal (not less) 
<> or >< not equal (greater than or less than) 

The associated 	statement may be any other valid TINY BASIC statement including, in particular, another IF statement. The following are some valid IF statements: 
IF I>25 THEN END 
IF A>B IF B>C I=I+1 
(The last statement increments I only if B is between C and A.) 

TRANSFERS OF CONTROL 

TINY BASIC normally executes statements in a program in statement number order. The following statements may be used to alter this flow: 

(a) 	GOTO expression 

The subsequent statement executed is the one whose line number equals the value of the expression. Note that this permits you to compute the line number of the next statement on the basis of program parameters during execution. The following are some valid GOTO statements: 

GOTO 100
GO TO 200 + 1*10 

10-7 

CDP18S020 Evaluation Kit COSMAC TINY BASIC 

(b) GOSUB expression 

This statement executes exactly as does the GOTO statement, except that in addition TINY records (remembers) the statement number of the following statement (the one which would have 'been executed next, had the branch not taken place). 

(c) RETURN

This statement (which also has the short form RET) executes by transferring control back to the statement whose number was last recorded as the result of the execution of a GOSUB. This last-recorded statement number is also forgotten. 

SUBROUTINE NESTING 

A subroutine is a sub-program which is normally evoked in two or more places within a main program. Rather than duplicate the statements of the sub-program in several places, it appears only once. It is written so that it exits with a RETURN statement. It is evoked at any point in a program by a GOSUB statement which transfers control to it. 

Whenever one subroutine calls another subroutine (termed subroutine "nesting"), an additional "return-statement-number" is recorded. These are stored in order, so that every RETURN jumps back to the statement following the GOSUB which called it. Subroutines may be nested to any depth, limited only by the amount of user program memory remaining. 

PRINT STATEMENT 

This statement has the form 
PRINT printlist 

where printlist is a succession of one or more items to be printed separated by either commas or semicolons. The acceptable short form for PRINT is PR. Each print item may be either an expression or a character string enclosed in quotes. In the first case the value of the expression is typed. In the second case the character string is printed verbatim. No spaces are generated 
10-8

CDP18S020 Evaluation Kit COSMAC TINY BASIC 

between the printouts of items separated by semicolons in the PRINT statement. 

On the other hand, the printout of an item, preceded by a comma in the PRINT statement, begins at the next "tab setting. Tabs are automatically set everyeight character spaces. Thus, 
PRINT 1,2,3 prints as 
1	2	3 
while PRINT 1;2;3  prints as 
123 

Commas and semicolons, character strings and expressions may be mixed in one PRINT statement in any manner. 

Normally, the execution of a PRINT statement terminates with the generation of a carriage return and line feed to begin a new line. However, if the PRINT statement ends with a comma or semicolon, then the CR-LF sequence is suppressed, permitting subsequent PRINT statements to output on the same line or permitting an input message (see INPUT, next) to appear on the same line as previous output. 

The following are valid PRINT statement examples: 

PRINT "A=";A,"B+C=";B+C
PR (generates a blank line) 
PRI (prints the value of variable I) 
PRINT 1,','.Q*P;",".R/42; 

INPUT STATEMENT 
This statement has the form 
INPUT inputlist 
where inputlist is a succession of one or more variables separated by commas. The acceptable short form for INPUT is IN. Normally, execution of this statement begins with the typing of a question mark prompt indicating that TINY is expecting the user to type in data. The user should respond by typing in a line of one or more expressions separated by commas and terminated with a carriage return. Each input expression is evaluated and assigned to its associated variable in the INPUT statement. 

10-9 

If the number of requested variables in the inputlist is not satisfied by the number of expressions in the user's input line, a new? prompt will be issued asking for more input information. If the number of expressions in the user's input line is greater than the number ot requested variables, then those input expressions not requested are saved internally and used to satisfy subsequent INPUT requests. Thus, before a ? prompt is issued during execution of an INPUT instruction, TINY first checks to see if any saved expressions exist. If so, then these are used first -to satisfy some or all of the variables requesting values. Only when no saved data exists is the ? prompt issued. The user is cautioned to use the latter property of the INPUT statement with care. 

Example: Suppose statement INPUT X,Y,Z is executed, and the user responds by typing A,C,B. The results are the same as if X=A, Y=C and Z=B had been executed. Note that commas are required in the user's input line only to avoid ambiguity. If he had entered ACB, the same results would have occurred. On the other hand, an input line of +1 -3 +6 0 in response to INPUT A,B,C,D will result in A being given the value 58 and a new ? prompt issued for values for B, C and D. 

SYSTEM CONTROL STATEMENTS 

The statements listed below are normally not included as part of a program. That is, they are normally entered without line numbers: 
(a) NEW
Execution of this statement clears the program area in memory. It is used before entering a new program. 
(b)  RUN 
Begin program execution at the first (lowest) line number. Note: If RUN is followed by a comma followed by a sequence of one or more expressions (separated with commas), then the expression list is treated as an initial input line --which will be scanned first whenever INPUT statements are executed. (See discussion of INPUT statement.) 

(c) LIST 
LIST expression 
LIST expression, expression

10-10 

COSMAC TINY BASIC CDP18S020 Evaluation Kit 
SYSTEM CONTROL STATEMENTS (cont'd) 
(c) 	(cont'd) The LIST statement causes part or all of a stored user program to be printed. If no parameters are given, the whole program is listed. A single expression parameter is evaluated to a line number. If the line exists, it is printed. If both parameters are given, all lines with numbers in the range specified are printed. 

10-11

SUMMARY OF COSMAC TINY BASIC REPERTOIRE 
The following should serve as your short form guide to the facilities offered by TINY BASIC. Characters enclosed in brackets [ ] are optional and may be omitted.

FORM OF STATEMENT 		BRIEF EXPANATION OF EXECUTION

REM any comment			Ignored.

END					Halt execution and return to I"enter" mode.

[LET} variable = expression		Assign the value of the expression to the variable

IF expr rel expr [THEN] statement	If the relation between the values of the expressions is TRUE,
					 execute the statement, otherwise, skip it.

GOTO expression			Jump to the statement whose number is the expression's value.

GOSUB expression			Save the statement number of the next statement
					in sequence. Then execute a GOTO.

RET[URN]				Jump to the last saved statement number
					(see GOSUB) and "unsave" this number.

PR[INT] printlist			Type the items in the printlist. Type values
					of expressions. Type quoted strings verbatim.
					Horizontal TAB on comma.

IN[PUT] inputlist			Read and evaluate expressions from the keyboard
					and assign them in order to the variables
					specified in the inputlist.

NEW					Clear the program area.

RUN[,expression sequence]		Start execution at first statement. (Save
					the expression sequence to satisfy
					subsequent INPUT's.)

LIST[expression],[expression]		Print entire program, or one selected line,
					or a range of lines.

where:

number = -32768 to +32767; variable = single capital letter.

expression = one or more numbers or variables (possibly grouped by parentheses) joined by operators +,-,*, or /.

relations are =,>,<,<=,>=,<>, or >< 

printlist = one or more expressions or quoted strings separated by commas or semicolons. 

inputlist = one or more variables separated by commas. 

expression sequence = one or more expressions separated by commas. 

NOTE: 	The RND(exprl,expr2) function generates a positive random number in the range between the values of the expressions. This function may be used anywhere in place of a number. 

10-12 

CDP18S020 COSMAC TINY BASIC 

IMMEDIATE EXECUTION VS. PROGRAM MODE 

One important use of the immediate execution mode (entering a statement without a line number) is to permit line-at-a-time testing. LET, IF and PRINT can be demonstrated this way. Due to the way TINY BASIC buffers its input lines, the INPUT statement cannot be directly executed for more than one variable at a time, and if the following statement is typed in without a line number, 
INPUT A,B,C 
the value of B will be copied to A, and only one value (for C) will be requested from the console/terminal. Similarly, the statement, 
INPUT X,1,Y,2,Z,3 
will execute directly (loading.X,Y, and Z with the values 1,2,3), requesting no input, but with a line number, in a program, this statement will produce an error stop after requesting one value. 

Clearly there is no point to executing REM or END in the immediate mode. Furthermore, GOSUB and RETURN are normally meant for the program mode. On the other hand, an immediate GOTO has the same effect as if RUN were typed, but execution may begin at other than the program's first statement.
 
Similarly, the stored program should not contain a NEW statement (self destruct!), and a stored RUN statement will be equivalent to a GOTO to the first statement. On the other hand, a LIST statement may be included as part of a program and used for printing large text strings, such as instructions to the operator. 
10-13 

CDP18S020 Evaluation Kit COSMAC TINY BASIC 

PROGRAMMING EXAMPLES 

The following two simple programs are designed to give you examples of TINY BASIC in action. The first uses most of the statements in TINY's repertoire. The second demonstrates particularly the use of subroutines. REMarks are omitted from the listings to keep them short. Instead, each program is accompanied by a detailed explanation of its functioning. (It should be emphasized that omission of comments is generally bad documentation practice, but it suits our present objectives.) Each program can be entered in a few minutes. It is recommended that you run both of them to gain. experience with the system. 

I. Arithmetic Drill Program 

This program generates a random sequence of arithmetic problems. After the program prints the problem, you respond with your solution. The program tells you whether your answer was correct or not (providing the right answer in the latter case) and then proceeds to generate a new problem, and so on. 

Stepping through the program listed below: first, three random numbers are generated. The value of F (1 to 4) will be used to decide whether this will be an add, subtract, multiply or divide problem. The range of Possible values for the arguments A and B was chosen to prevent the Possiblity of overflow under two conditions: First, 181*181 is still less than 32767. Second, division by zero is prevented. Because TINY BASIC discards division remainders, the fourth state-ment is included to keep the division problems interesting. It says: If this is a division problem where the quotient would ordinarily come out as zero (true for many of the A,B combinations that might be generated), arbitrarily increase the size of the dividend (to a maximum of 18100 in this case) to make the problem non-trivial. Statement 50 begins the presentation of the problem to the user by printing an encouraging message followed by the value of the first argument. Notice that the final semicolon keeps the printer on the same line without advancing the carriage further. 

Statement 60 does a four-way branch based on the value of F (the arithmetic function selected). Thus, control passes next to one of the following statement numbers: 70, 100, 130 or 160. Each of these statements begins a short sequence which prints the sign for the arithmetic operation and then computes the proper 
10-14 

I. Arithmetic Drill Program (cont'd) 

function, placing the result in c. (Notice the final semicolons again, 
in the PRINT statements.) No matter which path is taken, control passes next to 
statement 180, which prints the second argument value followed by an = sign. 
The presentation of the problem to the user is now complete, and the INPUT 
statement at 190 delivers a ? prompt on the same print line and reads the 
user's answer into D. Statement 200, congratulates the user on a correct answer, 
while 210 points out that his answer was incorrect and provides him with the 
proper result. The commas at the end of both PRINT statements here again inhibit 
a new line from starting, but they space over to the next tab setting, where a new 
problem is posed as a result of the loop (at 220) back to the top. 

10 A=RND (1,181) 
20 B=RND (1,181)
30 F=RND (1,4) 
40 IF F=4 IF A/B<1 A=A*100 
50 PRINT "TRY THIS ONE: ";A;
60 60 TO 40+F*30 
70 PRINT "+";
80 C=A+B 
90 GO TO 180 
100 PRING "-";
110 C=A-B: 
120 GO TO 180 
130 PRINT "*"; 
140 C=A*B
150 GO TO 180 
160 PRINT "/";
170 C=A/B 
180 PRINT B;" =" ; 
190 INPUT D
200 IF D=C PRINT "RIGHT!". 
210 IF D <> C PRINT "WRONG. CORRECT ANSWER IS ";C,
220 GO TO 10 

Notice that an END statement is not present here --contrary to earlier advice. 
The nature of this program is such that TINY will never go past the last statement. 
The program as written loops endlessly, and only under these conditions is the 
omission of an END permissible. 
Running this program should give you some practice in learning how TINY divides.
10-15

CDP18S020 Evaluation Kit  COSMAC TINY BASIC  

II. Geometric Print Pattern Program 

This program is designed to print three identical, trapezoidal patterns across the page, each filled with repeated imprints of the same numeric digit. The user can specify which digit is to fill each trapezoid and, for all three, the number of characters across its top, the slope of its sides (positive or negative) and its height. He can also specify the spacing between the patterns on the page. 

Since the printer prints line-by-line, the program prints the pattern in a scanning mode. Every line consists of-a sequence of three identical segments, and each segment contains 0 spaces followed by E identical digits followed by D spaces again. The values of 0 and E vary from line to line. For each new line, 
D is decremented by a value I (positive or negative) and E is incremented by 2*F (to keep the pattern symmetrical). 

To analyze the program listed below, let us begin by identifying its subroutines. Reading from the bottom up, the subroutine from 250 to 280 prints the digit N, M times across (notice the semicolon). Similarly, the subroutine from 210 to 240 prints a sequence of M spaces. Finally, the subroutine from 140 to 200 prints 0 spaces followed by E digits (all N) followed again by 0 spaces. Notice that this subroutine calls the other two. 

The main part of the program runs from 10 to 130. First, the program initializes a counter J for the number of lines which have been printed. Then it reads (from the user) initial values for A to E, I and L (the total number of lines to be printed). A,B and C should be single digits. O,E and L must be > 0. Each of the three sequences 30-40, 50-60, and 70-80 prints one segment of a line using the digit specified by the user. 85 starts a new line. 90 and 100 advance D and E as explained earlier, and 110-120 decide whether or not a sufficient number of lines have yet been printed. If not, a new line is started. 
10-16

CDP18S020 Evaluation Kit COSMAC TINY BASIC 

GEOMETRIC PRINT PATTERN PROGRAM 

10 J=0 
20 INPUT A,B,C,D,E,I,L 
30 N=A 
40 GOSUB 140 
50 N=B 
60 GOSUB 140 
70 N=C 
80 GOSUB 140 
85 PRINT 
90 D=D-I
100 E=E+2+I 
110 J=J+1 
120 IF J<>L GO TO 30 
130 END
140 M=D 
150 GOSUB 210 
160 M=E 
170 GOSUB 250 
180 M=D 
190 GOSUB 210 
200 RETUrN 
210 PRINT " ";
220 M=M-1 
230 IF M>0 GOT0 210 
240 RETURN 
250 PRINT N;
260 M=M-1 
270 IF M>0 GOTO 250 
280 RETURN 

For this program to run properly the values of D and E should not become 
too small. Nor should they be so large as to require excessive line length. 
The inital values should obey the following relations: 3 (E+2D) < maximum line 
width; If I<0, E>2|I|(L-l); If I>0, D>I(L-1). 

10-17 

CDP18S020 Evaluation Kit COSMAC TINY BASIC 

THE USR FUNCTION 
TINY BASIC includes an important feature to permit you to extend its facilities via machine language subroutines. To use this feature, you must be familiar with many of the intricate details associated with machine language programming. Not only must you know the instruction set for the CPU (See MPM-201, User Manual for the COP1802 Microprocessor), but you must also be aware of which CPU and memory registers are reserved for TINY, which are freely available for your use and which can act as an interface between your machine-language program and your TINY BASIC program. We assume here that you are familiar with the manual cited above and that you have some introductory machine language programming experience. 

The form of the USR construct within a TINY BASIC statement is as follows: 

USR (expression [,expression][, expression ]) 

where the brackets indicate that either or both of the latter two expressions may be omitted. On encountering this form, TINY evaluates the first expression and transfers control to that address. (Remember that a desired hex address must be converted into its equivalent decimal expression value, and that addresses in the upper half of memory have negative equivalent decimal values.) If a second ex-pression is included, it is evaluated and the resulting value is passed to the called program as the contents of CPU register 8. If a third expression is included, its value is passed in register A (with D also holding RA.0). The subroutine receives control with P=3 and X=2. 

Your called program must return with a SEP 5 (D5) instruction. When it returns, its 16-bit function value is the final contents of RA.l and 0 (lower 8 bits in 0) just before the SEP 5 was executed. This. is why USR is called a function. Whenever it is called, it returns a result -a number. Thus, the USR form can appear anywhere in a TINY BASIC statement where a number can normally appear. (Recall our previous discussion of the RND function. Exactly the same idea applies here.) 

10-18 

Thus, in addition to performing some machine-language function (for example, moving a block of data), your USR program will always return a value or result in RA.l and D. In many cases, this is desirable --for example, when your subroutine is given two arguments X and Y (in R8 and RA) and returns a number which is, say, the larger of the two. In other cases, however, your USR program will not need to return a value. In that case the value returned must be ignored in the TINY BASIC program which called it. There are several ways to do this. For example, if 

+0*USR{......) 

were included in an expression, then the USR function would be executed but the returned value would be ignored. 

For your convenience, TINY itself includes four built-in subroutines which you may want to make use of via the USR mechanism. They are as follows: 

(1) USR(20,N) 

Returns the decimal value of the byte at memory location N (decimal), where N is the value of the second expression. (Note that this machine language routine begins at location 14 hex.) 

(2) USR(24,N,M) 

Stores the value of the third expression M (mod 256) into the byte at location N (decimal), the value of the second expression. Also returns the value M as the function's "value". 

Examples: PRINT USR(20,3072) prints the decimal contents of memory location C000
A=USR(24,3072,254) loads memory location OCOO with FE and also loads the"returned value", 254, into A. 

(3) USR(6) 

Reads one ASCII character from the keyboard and returns its decimal equivalent (including parity bit if any). 

10-19 

CDP18S020 Evaluation Kit 		COSMAC TINY BASIC 

(4) USR(9,0,C) 

Prints the ASCII character whose code is the right half of the (hex) value of expression C. (Note: The second expression, in this case 0, is iqnored. The character to be typed must start out in a D register. Hence, the above format. The third expression is passed in RA with its lower half also in D.) This routine happens to return a "value" 251 in all cases --which would normally be ignored, as explained earlier. 

Examples: 

PRINT USR(6) 
will read a character and print its decimal equivalent. On the printer you would see, for example, A65 for a zero parity bit (where A was typed by you).  

A = A+0úUSR(9,0,66) 
will print the character B and ignore the returned result (251).

Register Usage and An Example USR Routine: 

When you write your own USR routine, you must be careful not to modify the contents of those registers which are used by TINY BASIC. These include CPU registers and memory registers. Appendix B lists how the CPU registers are used by TINY. Machine language subroutines have the free use of 
R0,R1,R8,RA,RD and RF. 
In addition, R2 is pointing at a free byte on the control stack. 

Clearly, the memory areas used by TINY should also not be modified, except with care. TINY uses most of the first page of the available RAM (beginning at 0800) for its own storage. A table of the allocation of this space is given in Appendix C. You probably will not want to bother with any part of this area except for that which includes the A to Z variable cells. These are located at 0882 to 08B5. Note also that, by reducing the address value stored in 0822, you can make space for your added program and data areas in upper memory. 

10-20 
CDP18S020 Evaluation Kit COSMAC TINY BASIC 

Appendix D lists some key locations at the beginning of the TINY BASIC program itself. (Notice locations 6, 9, 14 and 18 which correspond to the entry points for the built-in subroutines discussed earlier.) TINY BASIC was written as a pure procedure (capable of execution out of ROM) --not modified in any way as it runs. This area should not be altered except, conceivably, for modifications to the special character codes beginning at location F. This is discussed further later in this manual. 

Consider now an example of a USR added routine. Assume we wish to add a logica AND operation to TINY's repertoire. The machine language routine given below will do the job, given that the two arguments are passed in R8 and RA, and that the computed result must be passed back in RA.l and D. 

98	GHI	R8
52	STR	R2
9A	AND
BA	PHI	RA
88	GLO	R8
52	STR	R2

8A	GLO	RA
F2	AND
D5	SEP	R5

Given two l6-bit arguments, this routine computes the l6-bit AND of these and returns that result. Note the use of the spare byte pointed to by R2 and the assumption that X=2 on entry. Notice also the SEP R5 exit. This routine can be stored in any available memory area.

Assuming the above program is stored at location 0C00, then if L=3072, the statement T=USR(L,R,S) will assign to T the l6-bit AND of the values of variables R and S. 

10-21 

ERROR MESSAGES AND PROGRAM DEBUGGING 

Error Messages: 

Whenever TINY BASIC detects an error in a statement, it generates an error message consisting of an exclamation point followed by a decimal error number. A listing of error numbers and their corresponding meanings is given in Appendix E. If the error is detected during program execution, the error code is followed by the word AT followed by the offending statement's number. 

Almost all of the errors detected by TINY are syntax errors. TINY was in the process of interpreting a statement and found it unacceptable for some reason. Only two of the errors in the error list are detected during execution of a statement (i.e., after its syntax has been accepted). These are errors 141 and 
243. 
Any other error number not listed in the table signifies a memory "full" condition --probably due to too many nested GOSUB's or an excessively complex expression. 

Program Debugging:

Most program execution errors are due to either incorrect flow or improper modification of variable values. To find an error of the first kind, you must determine whether your program is sequencing properly -- whether certain sections of code are indeed executed when expected. Often, the insertion of dummy PRINT statements within suspected code sections will reveal whether the flow within the program is proper. 

The second type of error is most easily detected by inserting dummy program stops at key point. This procedure is also useful for diagnosing incorrect flow. A dummy stop is an inserted END, or some other inserted statement which is intent-ionally erroneous to cause an error stop. Once the stop occurs, you may examine the values of key variables (using the immediate execution mode -e.g., PRINT A,B,C) to see if they indeed have the expected behavior. In some cases, variable values may be corrected, in the iramediate mode, while the program is still stopped. In this case, and in the case where the program behavior is proper so far, you will want to resume the program at the point where it last stopped. An immediate or direct GOTO, using the statement number after the stop, will permit the program to proceed as if it had not been interrupted. 

10-22 

CDP18S020 Evaluation Kit COSMAC TINY BASIC 

APPENDIX A 

LOADING AND STARTING TINY BASIC 

The hexadecimal listing given below is the TINY BASIC object program (listed in UT4 semicolon format). Initially, you will have to load this file into memory by hand from the keyboard and then verify that it is a faithful copy. While this process is time consuming, it needs to be done only once. After memory is loaded, the contents of the first 2K bytes should be properly recorded on your peripheral file storage medium. Section III of your Evaluation Kit Manual contains instructions for recording a file from memory (using UT4's ?M command) onto a Teletype's paper tape or a TI terminal's magnetic tape cassette. If your terminal is different from either of these, you must develol equivalent procedures to those described in the manual. Once you have correctly recorded a copy of TINY BASIC on paper tape or tape cassette, it should be easily reloadable by preceding the tape read with a !M from the keyboard. This is discussed in the Evaluation Kit Manual. 

Once TINY BASIC has been loaded, it may be started at one of two locations: 

$P1 is the normal "cold" start. TINY BASIC initializes itself (sizes memory; copies a control block from OOOF-OOIB to 08l3-08lF; and marks the user program space empty) and then delivers the,: prompt.
 
$P3 is the "warm" start, which skips the initialization procedure and preserves the state of RAM. It is used as a restart, when there is already a useful program resident in RAM or when certain control parameters have been modified so that they are different from those which were first initialized. If, after a "warm" start, you wish to enter a new program, type the NEW command. 

[pages 10-24 and 10-25 are the Tiny BASIC hex dump. See the JPEG image file  and HEX file for that information.]
10-23

APPENDIX B 

REGISTER ALLOCATIONS 
Registers R0 and R1 are not used by TINY BASIC in any way. In addition, the program makes no reference to Q or EFl,2,3 or 4. All character I/O is funnelled through a vector near the beginning of the program. The user may request the performance of INP or OUT instructions as part of the BASIC program, but these are up to the user's discretion. 

The other registers used by TINY are as follows: 
2 Control stack pointer.
3 Inner interpreter Program Counter.
4 Call linkage PC. 
5 Return linkage PC. 
6 Top of control stack; -address of caller. Also holds branch address.
7 Byte Fetch PC. 
8 Temporary work register. Receives second argument in USR call 
9 OUter interpreter Program Counter. ~address of next IL opcode. 
A l6-bit accumulator and work register. Contains third argument of USR calls, and part of response from USR calls. 
B BASIC Pointer. Points to next token.
C Timing subroutine in  Terminal I/O. 
D Workspace memory pointer. = Expression Stack Pointer in USR calls. 
E Subroutine linkage temporary and Terminal timing constant. 
F Temporary work register. 

Machine language subroutines called via the USR function have the free use of R0,R1,R8,RA,RD,RF. 

10-26 
APPENDIX C 
USE OF FIRST PAGE OF USER RAM BY TINY BASIC 

0812		UT3/UT4 output delay flag 
0813		Copy of BACKSPACE code 
0814		Copy of CANCEL code 
0815		Copy of Pad code 
0816		Copy of Tape Mode Enable 
0817		Copy of Spare stack Space 
0818		Execution mode flag 
0819		End of input line 
081A		Expression Stack pointer 
081B		Output Control 
081C-081D	Saved address for NX 
081E-081F	Copy of IL base address 
0820-0821	Lowest address of user program space 
0822-0823	Highest address of user program space 
0824-0825	End of user program + stack reserve 
0862-0827	Top of GOSUB stack 
0828-0829	Current Line number in BASIC 
082A-082D	Temporary 
082E-082F	Input line pointer 
0830-087F	Input line, buffer and expression computation stack 
0880-0881	Random Number Generator seed 
0882-08B5	BASIC variables A-Z 

Note: Each basic variable occupies two bytes beginning page which is twice its ASCII code. 

Displacement Variable 

0082		A
0084		B
...
00B4		Z

10-27 
CDP18S020 Evaluation Kit COSMAC TINY BASIC 

APPENDIX D
ALLOCATIONS IN LOW RAM

0001 Cold Start
0003 Warm Start
0006-0008 LBR to character input
0009-000B LBR to character output
000C-000E LBR to Break test
000F Backspace code
0010 Line Cancel code
0011 Pad character .
0012 Tape Mode enable flag (hex 80=enab1ed)
0013 Space stack size
0014 Byte fetch subroutine
0016 Double byte fetch entry vector
0018 Byte store Subroutine
001A-001B Address of IL
001C-001D User space start for scan
001E Page for memory wrap test
001F Page for workspace
0120 Entry vector for Hex input
0123 Entry vector for Hex print
0126 Entry vector for I/O
0129 Entry vector for AND
0800 Beginning of user RAM space


APPENDIX E 

ERROR MESSAGE SUMMARY

0 Break during execution 
8 Memory overflow; line not inserted 
9 Line number 0 not allowed 
11 RUN with no program in memory 
33 Improper syntax in GOTO 
35 Nolineto GO TO 
40 LET is missing a variable name 
42 LET is missing an = 
45 Improper syntax in LET 
47 LET is not followed by END 
65 Missing close quote in PRINT string 
83 Circumflex in PRINT is not at end of statement 
85 PRINT not followed by END 
101 IF not followed by END 
111 INPUT syntax bad -expects variable name 
130 INPUT syntax bad -expects comma 
131 INPUT not followed by END 
140 RETURN syntax bad 
141 RETURN has no matching GOSUB 
142 GOSUB not followed by END 
147 END syntax bad 
179 LIST syntax error -expects comma 
189 Can't LIST line number 0 
193 LIST not followed by END 
198 REM not followed by END 
199 Missing statement type ke~lord 
201 Misspelled statement type keyword 
243 Divide by zero 
276 Syntax error in Expression -expects value 
281 RND expects two arguments 
286 Missing right parenthesis 
321 IF expects relation operator 
356 Invalid arguments in RND 

All other error numbers signify memory overflow (too many nested GOSUBS) or an excessively complex expression. 

10-29 

CDP18S020 Evaluation Kit COSMAC TINY BASIC 

APPENDIX F 

SPECIAL KEYBOARD CONTROL CHARACTERS 
You may erase (backspace over) an incorrectly-entered character by hitting the "erase previous character" key. Its hex code is stored in location 000F, and it is presently an ASCII Left-arrow or Underline (Shift 0; hex 5F). Each occurrence of _ erases the last stored input character. Thus, 

POINT ____ RINT
corrects the erroneous second character. Similarly, you may erase the entire input line and start over by hitting, the "cancel line" character. Its hex code is stored in location 0010, and it is presently an ASCII CANCEL (Control X; hex 18) . You may change either of these edit control characters by changing its stored codeú to any value except DC3, LF, NULL, or DELETE (hex codes 13, OA, 00 and FF, respectively). These special characters are trapped by TINY before its line edit code is entered. 

The BREAK key may be used for two purposes: to interrupt a long LISTing or to interrupt the execution of a program (for example, one caught in an endless loop). While executing the LIST command, TINY checks BREAK at the beginning of every typed line. While executing a stored program, TINY checks BREAK between statements. 

Each of your input lines from the keyboard 'is terminated with a carriage return (CR). Whenever TINY generates a new line (for example, when it echoes your CR), it generates CR PAD PAD LF PAD, where the pad character depends on the 2**7 bit of location 0011 (hex). If 0, it is the NULL character (hex 00). If 1, it is the RUBOUT/DELETE character (hex FF). The rest of the byte in location 0011 defines the count of the number of pads to be sent between each, CR and LF. It is presently set to 2. 

SUMMARY OF KEY CHARACTERS 

CR	Terminates every entry line. 
_	Backspace. 
CAN	Cancel line. 
BREAK Interrupt long printout or execution. 

10-30

Appendix G 

Tape Control Characters 

Whenever TINY generates the ? prompt character (during execution of an INPUT statement), it follows this by generating the XON (ASCII DC1) control character. If the input comes from tape, the user may elect to use this special control character to activate the tape reader. 

Similarly, TINY generates the XOFF (ASCII DC3; hex 13; Control S) control character whenever an error stop or NEW or END occurs - under the assumption that the user may want to deactivate the reader with this character. 

These control characters may be ignored if the user has found an alternative method for tape I/O. 

10-31 